this video is brought to you by my
patrons if you'd like to support my
channel and get access to extras like
audio commentaries a patron exclusive
podcast and uncut videos you can join by
clicking the link in the description
it's january 22nd 2001
and 12 year old me is laying in bed
unable to sleep
flicking through the channels on my tv
ceaselessly
when i come across this
as you can imagine it immediately caught
my eye
especially considering what happens
right after this which i can't show you
on youtube
and what caught my eye
turned into an avid attachment to a
certain group of queer characters living
in pittsburgh pennsylvania
first and most noticeable there's brian
the vain sexually promiscuous
advertising executive who hides a
generous spirit behind a self-obsessed
and even cruel personality
justin a bright-eyed high schooler who's
fallen in love with brian but didn't
quite realize that though brian was his
first
justin was nothing more than a hookup to
him
at least at first michael brian's best
friend still suffering from a teenage
crush that never went away stuck in a
dead-end job where he has to pretend to
be straight around his homophobic
co-workers
emmett michael's flamboyant roommate who
comes across as your typical vapid
flaming queen but becomes probably the
best character on the show
ted a loveless accountant who thinks
he's completely undesirable and envies
brian's ability to get any man that he
wants
lindsay brian's college girlfriend who's
now a lesbian or maybe bisexual
in the very first episode she gave birth
to a baby for which brian was the
surrogate and thereafter she basically
acts as brian's conscience on more than
one occasion melanie lindsay's hard-ass
jewish lawyer life partner who hates
brian with a burning passion
and last but certainly not least
debbie michael's loving mother who
covers herself with p flag pins and acts
as a sort of den mother to the guys who
eat at the diner she works at
where she busts her butt doing double
shifts to make the money she needs to
take care of her brother vic who's dying
of aids
the first three episodes were all aired
at once as a premiere episode in canada
whereas the show had already been out
for about a month in the u.s so i wasn't
sure if i was watching a new tv show i'd
never heard of or a movie
i was hoping for a tv show
so on that night in january of 2001
i spent three hours getting to know at
least a little bit about each one of
these characters
luckily the three episodes ended on a
cliffhanger so i knew i'd be back the
next week volume down low glued to my tv
screen
having never seen any kind of gay media
before except will and grace i was
astounded at the bluntness of the show's
portrayal of sex drugs homophobia being
in the closet dealing with disease and
friendship
specifically adult friendship between
queer people the show aired for five
seasons with its final episode airing in
august of 2005
and for those five years i grew up with
the show
i laughed i cried i raged and i cheered
i even got my mom to watch it and so it
shocks me now in 2022
that most of the queer people i talk to
have either never seen or never even
heard of this show that was a ratings
juggernaut for showtime
and which the new york times declared
was
genuinely revolutionary
so let's have a look back two decades
and see why we queer folk
don't tend to talk
about queer as folk
[Music]
queer's folk was based on a british tv
show of the same name created by russell
t davies when the original uk series of
queers folk premiered in 1999 it caused
outrage over scenes depicting gay sex
extensive drug use artificial
insemination and more sex scenes than
you can count
set in manchester's lively gay scene the
series chronicled the lives of three gay
men living in and around canal street
the show was sexually graphic and
unapologetically gay the series pushed
the envelope of what could be shown on
television
the show's slogan even read
no victims no murders no role models
the show was criticized from all fronts
religious leaders demanded it be removed
from television conservatives boycotted
the network and gay viewers claimed it
did nothing but perpetuate the harmful
stereotype of the promiscuous gay man
all that said the ratings were through
the roof
watching people be naughty has always
been a popular genre of tv from 80s
soaps like dallas and dynasty to dramas
like shameless and reality tv shows like
the real housewives
it was like watching a tabloid magazine
come to life in the comfort of your
living room
and nothing succeeds like success
so it was no surprise when north
american producers daniel lippman roy
cohen and tony jonas wanted to adapt the
series for the u.s market
they had a hell of a time trying to
convince a u.s network to pick it up
though even hbo which had just seen a
massive success with sexually explicit
shows like oz and sex in the city turned
them down they were convinced a show all
about queer characters wouldn't sell in
america showcase a canadian network was
actually the first to come on board and
agree to co-produce the series before
they finally struck a deal with showtime
in the united states for an initial
22-episode season
this meant the show would be a
canadian-american co-production with
most of the shooting happening in
ontario with toronto standing in for
pittsburgh the producers wanted to make
a show for queer people so they did
their best in hiring out-gay actors
but since coming out at the time was
pretty much a guaranteed career death
for an actor the show did end up being
made up of a majority straight cast
when the show premiered it immediately
grabbed the attention of the gay press
but that was it
only a few short years prior ellen had
been drummed out of hollywood for coming
out on her own sitcom
and even though will and grace portrayed
as sanitized a gay experience as
possible the nbc show's ratings were yet
to take off the mainstream press simply
wasn't interested in covering this gay
show with a word that was at the time
still considered a slur in the title
audiences felt differently though
the ratings for the premiere were strong
and they just kept getting better every
week when the show made its premiere in
canada a month later it became the
highest rated premiere in canadian
history
for a show not on the cbc the press
started paying attention
and just like in england some people
were not happy
a boycott of cbs was called for cbs
being the parent network to showtime
and death threats were made against the
stars and producers
and that was just the reaction coming
from the gay audience yes history was
repeating itself as the gay community
felt disgusted by the show's portrayal
of gay men as sexually liberated they
hated the casual drug use and felt
offended by the main storyline in which
17 year old justin has sex with and
subsequently falls in love with 29 year
old brian and they loathed that much of
the show took place surrounded by the
thumpathumpa beats of the gay nightclub
babylon conservative groups also called
for boycotts sent death threats and
demanded the show's cancellation
also on moral grounds because
you know what they say about war making
for strange bedfellows but not because
the show's queer characters were not
perfect but because they existed at all
i thought i'd die fighting sight by
sanchez a bigot mary you were arguing on
the same side as a bigot naturally
showtime and especially their parent
company viacom were worried
there was a threat that they might drop
the show to which canadian production
company temple street productions
offered to buy them out and make the
show a wholly canadian produced project
but when the ratings just kept going up
and up and up
showtime's fears were assuaged the show
was garnering far better ratings than
well quite frankly better than anyone
had ever expected especially since a
vocal part of the queer community had
sworn off watching the show the
demographic that was expected to be the
primary audience what the network
eventually discovered was that the
majority of the viewers were actually
straight women who were living for this
type of high drama you didn't really get
on tv anymore queer as folk was
unapologetically soapy a genre for which
fans had recently been left starving for
with the end of shows like melrose place
and beverly hills 90210 it would take a
few years before network tv would start
premiering shows like desperate
housewives so this show about gay men
and women in pennsylvania was becoming
their main source of entertainment and
since women between the ages of 18 and
45 are considered a marketing wet dream
it allowed queers folk to start charging
more for advertising during the
commercial breaks by the end of the
first season they were one of the most
talked about shows on cable the boycott
never really seemed to materialize the
show hadn't been renewed for a second
season yet though so they used a tried
and tested tool that had been used by
soap operas since the beginning of time
a cliffhanger ending that is dripping
with so much suspense that audiences
would do just about anything
to know how it would be resolved
[Music]
justin goes to his prom with best friend
daphne after begging brian to be his
date though brian being brian turns him
down he's having a fun enough time but
when brian does show up
it's simply fireworks
they dance to the song save the last
dance for me by the drifters
it is as brian later quips
ridiculously romantic after where justin
walks brian back to his jeep before
heading back to his prom to spend the
rest of the night with daphne he's
practically floating as he walks away
until chris hobbs a bully who's been
torturing him all season
appears behind him with a pipe and hits
him across the head with justin a bloody
mess being rushed to the hospital the
season ends the audience does not know
if he's alive
or dead
demand for a second season was loud
swift and decisive
with showtime renewing it for another 20
episodes within the first week after the
season finale in the second season
justin is of course alive though
suffering from brain damage he'd hoped
to be an artist but a tremor in his hand
resulting from the attack seems to have
put that dream to bed but with the help
of a drawing tablet a pretty expensive
gift at the time from brian
justin can keep drawing defying the will
of his attacker speaking of his attacker
he's let off with a slap on the wrist
and some community service
sometimes things never change
season two continued to push the
boundaries of what had been seen on
american television before with michael
becoming involved in a romantic
relationship with ben an hiv-positive
university professor unlike the first
season where gay media lambasted the
show they were now willing to praise it
for its portrayal of living with an
hiv-positive partner and surviving
trauma because gays will validate
themselves only if tragic they weren't
thrilled with the character of ted
starting up a porn studio and emmett
becoming a cam star but they kept their
mouths mostly shut regarding those
storylines it's harder to threaten to
boycott a show that's bringing queer
issues into millions of homes each week
the show even poked fun at its own gay
critics with the in-universe tv show gay
as blazes
with its cast of hrc approved gay
characters that brian loads the second
season also dealt with topics like gay
marriage with a commitment ceremony
between melanie and lindsay
intergenerational love when emmett falls
in love with a much older man
polyamorous relationships and a gay
murder victim based on the real life
case of billy london whose body was
found in a dumpster outside a diner with
ratings doing better than ever the show
was renewed for a third season halfway
through season two's run but because of
the canadian dollar rising in value and
therefore production becoming more
expensive the episode run was cut from
20 to 14 for the third and fourth
seasons
and 13 for the final season season 3
broadens its narrative scope as michael
and justin begin publishing an explicit
gay superhero comic as brian becomes the
pr manager for a homophobic politician
who used to be a cop
as ted loses his porn company when it's
discovered that one of his employees a
production assistant was underage much
to his shock and horror and michael and
ben adopt a homeless teenage sex worker
and help him get back to a normal life
season 4 goes darker than any before it
exploring ted's descent into drug abuse
and recovery justin joining a vigilante
group that violently attacks homophobes
giving justin the opportunity to finally
confront his would-be killer brian being
diagnosed with cancer and debbie's
beloved brother vic passing away due to
complications from aids
season four also deals heavily with the
current political state of the u.s
referencing the real life event of
president george w bush calling for a
constitutional amendment to ban gay
marriage the season ends with most of
the main cast going to canada for a
charity bike ride and having to reckon
with how they're treated in their home
country compared to the great white
north season 4 also saw the show's run
time extended from 1 hour to 1 hour and
15 minutes
not because an extra 15 minutes of story
was added but because advertising spots
on the show were in such high demand
that they could add extra commercials to
each broadcast great for the show but
not so great for me a then high school
student who's already staying up well
past midnight to watch the show
season 5 explored dating a closeted
person the domestication of queer
couples as michael and ben buy a house
in the suburbs and move away from the
gay village with its sex clubs and gay
bars growing up as they call it while
brian fights against gentrification
which
i think it can be a little condescending
to ascribe your chosen lifestyle as
grown up and implying that others need
to grow up just because they want
something different all while a
statewide bill proposition 14 threatens
to remove what few rights the gay
community has managed to accumulate the
final act of the series begins as a
fundraiser is bombed
leaving many of the main cast in mortal
danger
in the final episode aptly titled we
will survive
melanie and lindsey move to canada in
order to attempt to escape the growing
homophobia of their home country
michael who has always been a bit shy of
even talking about being gay begins
actively fighting for gay rights
and the on-again off-again relationship
between brian and justin which could be
described as the emotional through line
of the series
firmly switches to off
the show ended its run after 83 episodes
not because of bad ratings but because
showtime didn't want to be known as the
gay network
since they were also airing the l word
at the same time the network would
eventually say that the cancellation was
due to rising production costs as the
canadian dollar increased ever more in
value but the cast vehemently disagreed
showcase was willing to produce a season
six to air in canada since they were
making so much money from advertising on
the show but due to ownership rights at
the time showtime wouldn't allow it
and so
queer as folk hailed as groundbreaking
dynamic-shifting must-see tv
came to an end
not with a bang but a whimper
as the show's straight audience moved
back to network tv which had picked up
the torch for soapy primetime dramas and
its gay audience to my surprise
was glad to see it go although the gay
criticisms of the show had died down
over the years especially after it
became a rating success
ire toward the series from gay groups
looking to assimilate into the straight
culture
never ceased they argued that since the
show was made up of almost entirely
queer characters
that it was ghettoizing lgbt
representation
with the much preferring the appearance
of gay characters in mainstream straight
shows
[Music]
upon the announcement of the show's
final season extra magazine wrote about
why queer as folk was no longer needed
gay tv characters are now so common that
their sexual preferences have become
invisible to most viewers
there have been gay parents on roseanne
gay undertakers on six feet under gay
doctors on chicago hope and er
gay prisoners on oz gay teens on
degrassi and even gay cartoons on south
park depictions of gay people on tv
don't seem to upset viewers the way they
used to gay cartoons on south park
fantastic representation others
in the gay press agreed though who
needed a show all about gay people when
we could be supporting straight people
on normal shows
smile mary the straights are watching
and they're judging you the underlying
argument and sometimes not even
underlying being that a show like queer
as folk with its abundance of sex casual
drug use swearing and generally being
not safe for family viewing could only
hurt the community as it fought for the
right to be seen as just like the
straits and normal getting straight
america on our side so that we could
have gay marriage legalized was more
important than representation of queer
characters who don't dream of suburban
life with two and a half kids that was
the gay agenda
and a show like queer's folk could only
hurt that agenda because it dared to
show
that not all of us actually wanted it
the goal of assimilation was only
achievable if we acted as a united body
if one of us spoke out in support of
lifelong promiscuity
there was a fear that some anita bryant
knockoff would point to that gay circa
queen and say
see
you don't deserve to be treated like us
because at least one of you is not like
us
interesting then that approval of
same-sex couples in america was growing
throughout the run of queers folk
but according to gallup polling and this
is hilarious in a sad make you want to
bang your head off of the kitchen
cabinet kind of way
approval dropped by five points the year
after the show ended maybe not having
that regular supply of queer characters
being unapologetically messy
actually hurt the cause
it's hard to see us as the kind of
people you'd start up a chat with at the
water cooler
if we're all made out to be saints and
murders and all too easy to see his
massive [ __ ] when we don't live up
to that lofty expectation i'm making
copies move i'm gay support continued to
drop reaching a boiling point in 2008
with the passage of proposition 8 in
california of all states a
constitutional amendment banning gay
marriage after it had been legalized for
a short time in 2004
in the years following queer as folk
lgbt characters continued to pop up in
more
what we can qualify as straight tv shows
though rarely in lead roles and never
sexually explicit this has been changing
more recently of course with shows like
how to get away with murder and any
number of streaming shows
but in the decade after queer's folk
ended queer characters existed in a
sexless wasteland
and in many forms of mainstream media
still to this day remain trapped there
as gay networks like logo and otv began
cropping up we did start to see more
sexually active gay characters
but those were far from the mainstream
networks like showtime and usually
required you to subscribe to them
individually in your cable package so a
household filled with straight people
wasn't likely to come across noah's ark
or x's and o's it wasn't until 2014 with
the release of looking on hbo that
another gay-centric scripted drama made
its way to mainstream cable
but looking never came close to the
raiding success of queer as folk
and only lasted for 18 episodes and a tv
movie to tie off the loose ends
it just didn't have the must-see tv
quality that queer as folk did and quite
frankly seemed to lack a lot of the
emotional punch that kept viewers tuning
in the feeling that you need to keep
watching because you never know what
you'll see next queer as folk made you
care about each and every one of the
characters their lives their struggles
their victories and as a gay guy in a
small town these characters
were my only gay friends queer as folks
started airing just as i started coming
out
yes twelve-year-old me was very excited
to let people know that i was gay i was
weird like that and because i had this
support group of fictional gay
characters to hang out with every week
it made coming out easy for me even
seeing the stresses and traumas of the
gay community like hiv gay bashing and
homophobic families i felt like it would
be okay because i saw that there were
other people out there just like me
should i have been watching queer's folk
as a 12 year old maybe not but it's not
like there were any kid-friendly shows
about gay people on tv now were there
and if there had been disney probably
would have found a way to cancel them it
also acted as my sex ed class since the
show featured frank discussions of
sexually transmitted diseases and why
condom use was so important during the
show's run every gay person i met all
online mind you was obsessed with the
show but then when it ended it seemed to
be completely forgotten by everyone
fans critics people who praised it for
pushing boundaries
so i couldn't help but wonder when shows
like sex in the city which one could
argue is the straight version of queer's
folk have gone on to have long lives
after their final episodes with movies
and a revival series
why did queer as folk fade away into the
history of cable tv was it really just
that it wasn't needed anymore the gay
characters were appearing in straight
shows now so why would we need a show
just for them with it being a raiding
smash
why wasn't it until 2014 that another
network made a show about a group of gay
friends was queer's folk perfect
no
it's definitely a product of its time
with an almost entirely white cast
little to no trans representation and
with even bisexuality being an
afterthought but it was as the new york
times said
genuinely revolutionary
it changed the way gay characters could
be portrayed on tv we didn't have to be
sexless side characters hanging around
the periphery of the main cast in order
to be a punchline we could be
complicated we could have friends and
families of our own
we could have issues that weren't just
related to aids and gay bashing though
those were covered in detail
it showed the audience that there was so
much more to being gay than just loving
cher and madonna
though on june 9th a new version of
queer as folk did premiere on the
streaming service peacock
with a much more intersectional cast of
characters this might be the modern
update that we need
because in my opinion as queer people
are harassed out of more and more spaces
be they schools or locker rooms or
libraries or entire states
it's becoming clear to me the queer
inclusive spaces
simply aren't enough
despite what the gay press said in 2005
we really do still need exclusive queer
spaces too
places where we don't need to feel like
we need to put on a mask for the
cisgender heteros who judge us
for being the right kind of queer or not
who watch our every move to decide
whether or not we deserve rights
those spaces are still required and that
includes media spaces
we do in fact need shows and movies just
about us because we need to see
ourselves outside the sis hat norm we
might feel forced to adhere to
we need to see ourselves when we're with
other people like us
and i think with the new queerest folk
and the new movie bros coming out this
fall
major queer media producers might
finally be realizing this
they might as well make more shows and
movies just about us because it's not
like we're going anywhere
the thumpa thumpa continues
it always will
no matter what happens
no matter who's president no matter who
hates us no matter what idiot
politicians say no matter what [ __ ]
comedians say
because as our lady of disco the divine
miss gloria gaynor has always sung to us
we will survive
you